What was the system?
--------------------

The system in question was the Three-Mile Island nuclear power plant. It contained three buildings:
An Auxiliary building for processing waste water, a Containment building containing the reactor and
the steam generator, and a Turbine building, which contained the water pumps that pumped coolant
into the reactor, with filters to remove impurities from the water.

How did the system fail?
------------------------

The incident occurred on March 28, 1979. A valve had accidentally been left open. When workers tried
to dislodge a piece of resin blocking one of the filters in the Turbine building by blowing
compressed air into the filter (a normal occurrence), some water dripped through the open valve and
found its way into an air line. This eventually caused the turbine pump to shut down. This caused a
"scram" emergency shutdown in the reactor. The reactor continued to generate decay heat and steam
however, which built up in the reactor building. To remove the steam, several fail-safe pumps
activated, but because their valves had been shut down for maintenance, they failed to remove any
heat (it later transpired that these valves should not have been shut - this contravened one of the
usage regulations). The buildup of pressure caused a relief valve above the tank to open. This
should have then closed, but a mechanical failure meant that the valve remained open, enabling
radioactive coolant water and steam to escape. The buildup of heat led to a partial reactor
melt-down. Throughout all of this, plant operators didn't know how to respond because they were
confronted with 100 simultaneous alarms from different areas.

Had there been any prior warnings?
----------------------------------

There had been a similar incident in a different power plant (the Davis-Besse plant) the year
before. In the 18 months running up to the accident there had been numerous problems with particles
becoming stuck in the valves. No steps had been taken to correct these issues.

What parts of the system caused the failure?
--------------------------------------------

There were several parts that led to the melt-down. The valve that had been mistakenly left open (in
turn caused by poor operating procedures, which should have prevented this). The maintenance
shut-down of the fail-save pump valves, and the failure of the pressure-release valve to shut again.
Finally, the poor user-notification of errors - the overload of alarms meant that the workers were
not able to identify the specific problems in the system.

How could the failure have been prevented?
-------------------------------------------

The system should have been engineered to be more robust, including a better warning system and a
more intuitive interface for operators (especially to deal with numerous alarms). Its operators and
maintainers should have been trained (there was a limited understanding amongst operators of how the
system worked). Quality assurance procedures had only been applied to areas of the plant that were
deemed "safety critical", but not to the system as a whole. Had a proper QA procedure been applied
to the plant as a whole, it is likely that aspects of this disaster could have been prevented.
